Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
296. 99 (F 

34. 8)

A.
Severe recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally (e.g., verbal rages) and/or behaviorally (e.g., physical aggression towardpeople or property) that are grossly out of proportion in intensity or duration to the situation or provocation.

B.
The temper outbursts are inconsistent with developmental level.

C.
The temper outbursts occur, on average, three or more times perw eek.

D.
The mood between temper outbursts is persistently irritable orangry most of the day, nearly every day, and is observable by others (e.g., parents, teachers, peers).

E.
Criteria A–D have been present for 12 or more months. Throughout that time, the individual has not had a period lasting 3 or moreconsecutive months without all of the symptoms in Criteria A–D.

F.
Criteria A and D are present in at least two of three settings (i.e., athome, at school, with peers) and are severe in at least one of these.

G.
The diagnosis should not be made for the first time before age 6 years or after age 18 years.

H.
By history or observation, the age at onset of Criteria A–E is before 10 years.

I.
There has never been a distinct period lasting more than 1 dayduring which the full symptom criteria, except duration, for a manic or hypomanic episode have been met.

Note: Developmentally appropriate mood elevation, such as occurs in the context of a highly positive event or its anticipation, should not be considered as a symptom of mania or hypomania.

J.
The behaviors do not occur exclusively during an episode of major depressive disorder and are not better explained by another 93 mental disorder (e.g., autism spectrum disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, separation anxiety disorder, persistent depressive disorder [dysthymia]).

Note: This diagnosis cannot coexist with oppositional defiant disorder, intermittent explosive disorder, or bipolar disorder, though it can coexist with others, including major depressive disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, and substance use disorders. Individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for both disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and oppositional defiant disorder should only be given the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. If an individual has ever experienced a manic or hypomanic episode, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should not be assigned.

K.
The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects ofa substance or to another medical or neurological condition.

Major Depressive Disorder

A.
Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week period and represent a change from previousfunctioning; at least one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.

Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another medical condition.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g., appears tearful). (

Note: In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every day. (

Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day. 

5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others, not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).

6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.

7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delusional) nearly every day (not merely selfreproach or guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (either by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrentsuicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.

B.
The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairmentin social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

C.
The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of asubstance or to another medical condition.

Note: Criteria A–C represent a major depressive episode.

Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from a natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of intense sadness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Criterion A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be understandable or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive episode in addition to the normal response to a significant loss should also be carefully considered. This decision inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on the individual’s history and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context of loss.1

D.
The occurrence of the major depressive episode is not betterexplained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.

E.
There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.

Note: This exclusion does not apply if all of the manic-like or hypomanic-like episodes are substance-induced or are attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition.

Coding and

Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for major depressive disorder is based on whether this is a single or recurrent episode, current severity, presence of psychotic features, and remission status. Current severity and psychotic features are only indicated if full criteria are currently met for a major depressive episode. Remission specifiers are only indicated if the full criteria are not currently met for a major depressive episode. Codes are as follows:
Severity/course specifier Single episode Recurrent episode*
Mild (p. 114) 296. 21 (F 

32. 0) 296. 31 (F 

33. 0)
Moderate (p. 114) 296. 22 (F 

32. 1) 296. 32 (F 

33. 1)
Severe (p. 114) 296. 23 (F 

32. 2) 296. 33 (F 

33. 2)
Withpsychoticfeatures * * 296. 24 (F 

32. 3) 296. 34 (F 

33. 3)
(p. 111)
Inpartialremission (p. 114) 296. 25 (F 

32. 4) 296. 35 (F 

33. 41)
1 In distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode (MDE), it is useful to consider that in grief the predominant affect is feelings of emptiness and loss, while in an MDE, it is persistent depressed mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or pleasure. The dysphoria in grief is likely to decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves, the so-called pangs of grief. These waves tend to be associated with thoughts or reminders of the deceased. The depressed mood of an MDE is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations. The pain of grief may be accompanied by positive emotions and humor that are uncharacteristic of the pervasive unhappiness and misery characteristic of an MD

E.
The thought content associated with grief generally features a preoccupation with thoughts and memories of the deceased, rather than the self-critical or pessimistic ruminations seen in an MD

E.
In grief, selfesteem is generally preserved, whereas in an MDE, feelings of worthlessness and self-loathing are common. If self-derogatory ideation is present in grief, it typically involves perceived failings vis-à-vis the deceased (e.g., not visiting frequently enough, not telling the deceased how much he or she was loved). If a bereaved individual thinks about death and dying, such thoughts are generally focused on the deceased and possibly about “joining” the deceased, whereas in an MDE, such thoughts are focused on ending one’s own life because of feeling worthless, undeserving of life, or unable to cope with the pain of depression.

Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) 97
Severity/course specifier Single episode Recurrent episode*
Infullremission (p. 114) 296. 26 (F 

32. 5) 296. 36 (F 

33. 42)
Unspecified 296. 20 (F 

32. 9) 296. 30 (F 

33. 9)
*For an episode to be considered recurrent, there must be an interval of at least 2 consecutive months between separate episodes in which criteria are not met for a major depressive episode. The definitions of specifiers are found on the indicated pages.
**If psychotic features are present, code the “with psychotic features” specifier irrespective of episode severity.
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order: major depressive disorder, single or recurrent episode, severity/psychotic/remission specifiers, followed by as many of the following specifiers without codes that apply to the current episode.

Specify:
With anxious distress (pp. 107–108)
With mixed features (pp. 108–109)
With melancholic features (pp. 109–110)
With atypical features (pp. 110–111)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 111)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 111)
With catatonia (p. 111). Coding note: Use additional code
293. 89 (F 

06. 1).
With peripartum onset (pp. 111–112)
With seasonal pattern (recurrent episode only) (pp. 113–114)

Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia)
300. 4 (F 

34. 1)
This disorder represents a consolidation of DSM-IV-defined chronic major depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder.

A.
Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, asindicated by either subjective account or observation by others, for at least 2 years.

Note: In children and adolescents, mood can be irritable and duration must be at least 1 year.

B.
Presence, while depressed, of two (or more) of the following: 

1. Poor appetite or overeating.

2. Insomnia or hypersomnia.

3. Low energy or fatigue.

4. Low self-esteem.

5. Poor concentration or difficulty making decisions.

6. Feelings of hopelessness.

C.
During the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents) ofthe disturbance, the individual has never been without the symptoms in Criteria A and B for more than 2 months at a time.

D.
Criteria for a major depressive disorder may be continuously present for 2 years.

E.
There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode, and criteria have never been met for cyclothymic disorder.

F.
The disturbance is not better explained by a persistent schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or otherspecified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.

G.
The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects ofa substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g., hypothyroidism).

H.
The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairmentin social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

Note: Because the criteria for a major depressive episode include four symptoms that are absent from the symptom list for persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), a very limited number of individuals will have depressive symptoms that have persisted longer than 2 years but will not meet criteria for persistent depressive disorder. If full criteria for a major depressive episode have been met at some point during the current episode of illness, they should be given a diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Otherwise, a diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder is warranted.

Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) 99

Specify if:
With anxious distress (pp. 107–108)
With mixed features (pp. 108–109)
With melancholic features (pp. 109–110)
With atypical features (pp. 110–111)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 111)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 111)
With peripartum onset (pp. 111–112)

Specify if:
In partial remission (p. 114)
In full remission (p. 114)

Specify if:
Early onset: If onset is before age 21 years.
Late onset: If onset is at age 21 years or older.
Specify if (for most recent 2 years of persistent depressive disorder):
With pure dysthymic syndrome: Full criteria for a major depressive episode have not been met in at least the preceding 2 years.
With persistent major depressive episode: Full criteria for a major depressive episode have been met throughout the preceding 2-year period.
With intermittent major depressive episodes, with current episode: Full criteria for a major depressive episode are currently met, but there have been periods of at least 8 weeks in at least the preceding 2 years with symptoms below the threshold for a full major depressive episode.
With intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode: Full criteria for a major depressive episode are not currently met, but there has been one or more major depressive episodes in at least the preceding 2 years.
Specify current severity:
Mild (p. 114)
Moderate (p. 114)

Severe (p. 114) Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
625. 4 (N 

94. 3)

A.
In the majority of menstrual cycles, at least five symptoms mustbe present in the final week before the onset of menses, start to improve within a few days after the onset of menses, and become minimal or absent in the week postmenses.

B.
One (or more) of the following symptoms must be present: 

1. Marked affective lability (e.g., mood swings; feeling suddenlysad or tearful, or increased sensitivity to rejection).
2. Marked irritability or anger or increased interpersonal conflicts.

3. Marked depressed mood, feelings of hopelessness, or selfdeprecating thoughts.

4. Marked anxiety, tension, and/or feelings of being keyed up oron edge.

C.
One (or more) of the following symptoms must additionally bepresent, to reach a total of five symptoms when combined with symptoms from Criterion

B.
1. Decreased interest in usual activities (e.g., work, school, friends, hobbies).
2. Subjective difficulty in concentration.

3. Lethargy, easy fatigability, or marked lack of energy.

4. Marked change in appetite; overeating; or specific foodcravings.
5. Hypersomnia or insomnia.

6. A sense of being overwhelmed or out of control.

7. Physical symptoms such as breast tenderness or swelling, joint or muscle pain, a sensation of “bloating, ” or weight gain.

Note: The symptoms in Criteria A–C must have been met for most menstrual cycles that occurred in the preceding year.

D.
The symptoms are associated with clinically significant distressor interference with work, school, usual social activities, or relationships with others (e.g., avoidance of social activities; decreased productivity and efficiency at work, school, or home).

E.
The disturbance is not merely an exacerbation of the symptoms ofanother disorder, such as major depressive disorder, panic disorder, persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), or a personality disorder (although it may co-occur with any of these disorders).

F.
Criterion A should be confirmed by prospective daily ratings during at least two symptomatic cycles. (

Note: The diagnosis maybe made provisionally prior to this confirmation.)

G.
The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects ofa substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).

Recording Procedures
If symptoms have not been confirmed by prospective daily ratings of at least two symptomatic cycles, “provisional” should be noted after the name of the diagnosis (i.e., “premenstrual dysphoric disorder, provisional”).
Substance/Medication-Induced

Depressive Disorder

A.
A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture and is characterized by depressedmood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.

B.
There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both (1) and (2): 

1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon aftersubstance intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producingthe symptoms in Criterion

A.

C.
The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive disorderthat is not substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent depressive disorder could include the following:
The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non-substance/ medication-induced depressive disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).

D.
The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course ofa delirium.

E.
The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairmentin social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-induced depressive disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced depressive disorder, the 4 th position character is “1, ” and the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced depressive disorder (e.g.,
“mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced depressive disorder”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced depressive disorder, the 4 th position character is “2, ” and the clinician should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder, ” depending on the severity of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4 th position character is “9, ” and the clinician should record only the substance-induced depressive disorder.
ICD - 10 - C M
With use disorder,
With use moder- Without
ICD-9- disorder, ate or use
CM mild severe disorder
Alcohol 291. 89 F 

10. 14 F 

10. 24 F 

10. 94
Phencyclidine 292. 84 F 

16. 14 F 

16. 24 F 

16. 94
Otherhallucinogen 292. 84 F 

16. 14 F 

16. 24 F 

16. 94
Inhalant 292. 84 F 

18. 14 F 

18. 24 F 

18. 94
Opioid 292. 84 F 

11. 14 F 

11. 24 F 

11. 94
Sedative, hypnotic, o r 292. 84 F 

13. 14 F 

13. 24 F 

13. 94 anxiolytic
Amphetamine (orother 292. 84 F 

15. 14 F 

15. 24 F 

15. 94 stimulant)
Cocaine 292. 84 F 

14. 14 F 

14. 24 F 

14. 94
Other (orunknown) 292. 84 F 

19. 14 F 

19. 24 F 

19. 94 substance

Specify if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for diagnoses associated with substance class):
With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.

Recording Procedures
ICD-9-C

M.
The name of the substance/medication-induced depressive disorder begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the depressive symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for
“other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder is followed by the specification of onset
(i.e., onset during intoxication, onset during withdrawal). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM, which combine the substanceinduced disorder and substance use disorder into a single code, for ICD 9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder.
For example, in the case of depressive symptoms occurring during withdrawal in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is
292.84 cocaine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine use disorder is also given. When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of depressive mood symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., 292.84 methylphenidate-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal; 292.84 dexamethasone-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication).
ICD-10-C

M.
The name of the substance/medication-induced depressive disorder begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the depressive symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for
“other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed first, followed by the word “with, ” followed by the name of the substance-induced depressive disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset during withdrawal). For example, in the case of depressive symptoms occurring during withdrawal in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F 

14. 24 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not

Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 105 given. If the substance-induced depressive disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g.,
F 

16. 94 phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of depressive mood symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., F 

15. 24 severe methylphenidate use disorder with methylphenidate-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal; F 

19. 94 dexamethasone-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication).

Depressive Disorder
Due to Another Medical Condition

A.
A prominent and persistent period of depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activitiesthat predominates in the clinical picture.

B.
There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.

C.
The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, in which thestressor is a serious medical condition).

D.
The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course ofa delirium.

E.
The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairmentin social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for depressive disorder due to another medical condition is 293.83, which is assigned regardless of the specifier. The ICD-10-CM code depends on the specifier (see below).

Specify if:
(F 

06. 31) With depressive features: Full criteria are not met for a major depressive episode.
(F 

06. 32) With major depressive–like episode: Full criteria are met (except Criterion C) for a major depressive episode.
(F 

06. 34) With mixed features: Symptoms of mania or hypomania are also present but do not predominate in the clinical picture. Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental disorder (e.g., 293.83 [F 

06. 31] depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism, with depressive features). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed separately immediately before the depressive disorder due to the medical condition (e.g.,
244. 9 [ E 

03. 9 ] hypothyroidism; 293. 83 [ F 

06. 31 ] depressivedisorder due to hypothyroidism, with depressive features).

Other Specified Depressive Disorder
311 (F 

32. 8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a depressive disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the depressive disorders diagnostic class. The other specified depressive disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific depressive disorder. This is done by recording “other specified depressive disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “short-duration depressive episode”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation include the following:
1. Recurrent brief depression: Concurrent presence of depressedmood and at least four other symptoms of depression for 2–13 days at least once per month (not associated with the menstrual cycle) for at least 12 consecutive months in an individual whose presentation has never met criteria for any other depressive or bipolar disorder and does not currently meet active or residual criteria for any psychotic disorder.
2. Short-duration depressive episode (4–13 days): Depressedaffect and at least four of the other eight symptoms of a major depressive episode associated with clinically significant distress or impairment that persists for more than 4 days, but less than 14 days, in an individual whose presentation has never met criteria for any other depressive or bipolar disorder, does not currently meet ac Unspecified Depressive Disorder 107 tive or residual criteria for any psychotic disorder, and does not meet criteria for recurrent brief depression.
3. Depressive episode with insufficient symptoms: Depressedaffect and at least one of the other eight symptoms of a major depressive episode associated with clinically significant distress or impairment that persist for at least 2 weeks in an individual whose presentation has never met criteria for any other depressive or bipolar disorder, does not currently meet active or residual criteria for any psychotic disorder, and does not meet criteria for mixed anxiety and depressive disorder symptoms.

Unspecified Depressive Disorder
311 (F 

32. 9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a depressive disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the depressive disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified depressive disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific depressive disorder, and includes presentations for which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
Specifiers for

Specify if:
With anxious distress: Anxious distress is defined as the presence of at least two of the following symptoms during the majority of days of a major depressive episode or persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia):
1. Feeling keyed up or tense.

2. Feeling unusually restless.

3. Difficulty concentrating because of worry. 

4. Fear that something awful may happen.

5. Feeling that the individual might lose control of himself orherself.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Two symptoms.
Moderate: Three symptoms.
Moderate-severe: Four or five symptoms.
Severe: Four or five symptoms and with motor agitation.

Note: Anxious distress has been noted as a prominent feature of both bipolar and major depressive disorder in both primary care and specialty mental health settings. High levels of anxiety have been associated with higher suicide risk, longer duration of illness, and greater likelihood of treatment nonresponse. As a result, it is clinically useful to specify accurately the presence and severity levels of anxious distress for treatment planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With mixed features:

A.
At least three of the following manic/hypomanic symptomsare present nearly every day during the majority of days of a major depressive episode:
1. Elevated, expansive mood.

2. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.

3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.

4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts areracing.
5. Increase in energy or goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually).
6. Increased or excessive involvement in activities thathave a high potential for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, foolish business investments).
7. Decreased need for sleep (feeling rested despite sleeping less than usual; to be contrasted with insomnia).

B.
Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent achange from the person’s usual behavior.
Specifiers for 109

C.
For individuals whose symptoms meet full criteria for eithermania or hypomania, the diagnosis should be bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.

D.
The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiologicaleffects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication or other treatment).

Note: Mixed features associated with a major depressive episode have been found to be a significant risk factor for the development of bipolar I or bipolar II disorder. As a result, it is clinically useful to note the presence of this specifier for treatment planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With melancholic features:

A.
One of the following is present during the most severe periodof the current episode:
1. Loss of pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.

2. Lack of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli (does notfeel much better, even temporarily, when something good happens).

B.
Three (or more) of the following: 

1. A distinct quality of depressed mood characterized byprofound despondency, despair, and/or moroseness or by so-called empty mood.
2. Depression that is regularly worse in the morning.

3. Early-morning awakening (i.e., at least 2 hours beforeusual awakening).
4. Marked psychomotor agitation or retardation.

5. Significant anorexia or weight loss.

6. Excessive or inappropriate guilt.

Note: The specifier “with melancholic features” is applied if these features are present at the most severe stage of the episode.
There is a near-complete absence of the capacity for pleasure, not merely a diminution. A guideline for evaluating the lack of reactivity of mood is that even highly desired events are not associated with marked brightening of mood. Either mood does not brighten at all, or it brightens only partially (e.g., up to 20%–40% of normal for only minutes at a time). The “distinct quality” of mood that is characteristic of the “with melancholic features” specifier is experienced as qualitatively different from that during a nonmelancholic depressive episode. A depressed mood that is described as merely more severe, longer lasting, or present without a reason is not considered distinct in quality. Psychomotor changes are nearly always present and are observable by others.
Melancholic features exhibit only a modest tendency to repeat across episodes in the same individual. They are more frequent in inpatients, as opposed to outpatients; are less likely to occur in milder than in more severe major depressive episodes; and are more likely to occur in those with psychotic features.
With atypical features: This specifier can be applied when these features predominate during the majority of days of the current or most recent major depressive episode or persistent depressive disorder.

A.
Mood reactivity (i.e., mood brightens in response to actual orpotential positive events).

B.
Two (or more) of the following: 

1. Significant weight gain or increase in appetite.

2. Hypersomnia.

3. Leaden paralysis (i.e., heavy, leaden feelings in arms orlegs).
4. A long-standing pattern of interpersonal rejection sensitivity (not limited to episodes of mood disturbance) thatresults in significant social or occupational impairment.

C.
Criteria are not met for “with melancholic features” or “withcatatonia” during the same episode.

Note: “Atypical depression” has historical significance (i.e., atypical in contradistinction to the more classical agitated, “endogenous” presentations of depression that were the norm when depression was rarely diagnosed in outpatients and almost never in adolescents or younger adults) and today does not connote an uncommon or unusual clinical presentation as the term might imply.
Mood reactivity is the capacity to be cheered up when presented with positive events (e.g., a visit from children, compliments from others). Mood may become euthymic (not sad) even for ex Specifiers for 111 tended periods of time if the external circumstances remain favorable. Increased appetite may be manifested by an obvious increase in food intake or by weight gain. Hypersomnia may include either an extended period of nighttime sleep or daytime napping that totals at least 10 hours of sleep per day (or at least
2 hours more than when not depressed). Leaden paralysis is defined as feeling heavy, leaden, or weighted down, usually in the arms or legs. This sensation is generally present for at least an hour a day but often lasts for many hours at a time. Unlike the other atypical features, pathological sensitivity to perceived interpersonal rejection is a trait that has an early onset and persists throughout most of adult life. Rejection sensitivity occurs both when the person is and is not depressed, though it may be exacerbated during depressive periods.
With psychotic features: Delusions and/or hallucinations are present.
With mood-congruent psychotic features: The content of all delusions and hallucinations is consistent with the typical depressive themes of personal inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment.
With mood-incongruent psychotic features: The content of the delusions or hallucinations does not involve typical depressive themes of personal inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment, or the content is a mixture of mood-incongruent and mood-congruent themes.

With catatonia: The catatonia specifier can apply to an episode of depression if catatonic features are present during most of the episode. See criteria for catatonia associated with a mental disorder in the chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders.”
With peripartum onset: This specifier can be applied to the current or, if full criteria are not currently met for a major depressive episode, most recent episode of major depression if onset of mood symptoms occurs during pregnancy or in the 4 weeks following delivery.

Note: Mood episodes can have their onset either during pregnancy or postpartum. Although the estimates differ according to the period of follow-up after delivery, between 3% and 6% of women will experience the onset of a major depressive episode during pregnancy or in the weeks or months following delivery. Fifty percent of “postpartum” major depressive episodes actually begin prior to delivery. Thus, these episodes are referred to collectively as peripartum episodes. Women with peripartum major depressive episodes often have severe anxiety and even panic attacks. Prospective studies have demonstrated that mood and anxiety symptoms during pregnancy, as well as the “baby blues, ” increase the risk for a postpartum major depressive episode.
Peripartum-onset mood episodes can present either with or without psychotic features. Infanticide is most often associated with postpartum psychotic episodes that are characterized by command hallucinations to kill the infant or delusions that the infant is possessed, but psychotic symptoms can also occur in severe postpartum mood episodes without such specific delusions or hallucinations.
Postpartum mood (major depressive or manic) episodes with psychotic features appear to occur in from 1 in 500 to
1 in 1, 000 deliveries and may be more common in primiparous women. The risk of postpartum episodes with psychotic features is particularly increased for women with prior postpartum mood episodes but is also elevated for those with a prior history of a depressive or bipolar disorder (especially bipolar I disorder) and those with a family history of bipolar disorders.
Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with psychotic features, the risk of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30% and 50%. Postpartum episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring in the postpartum period, which is distinguished by a fluctuating level of awareness or attention. The postpartum period is unique with respect to the degree of neuroendocrine alterations and psychosocial adjustments, the potential impact of breastfeeding on treatment planning, and the long-term implications of a history of postpartum mood disorder on subsequent family planning.
Specifiers for 113
With seasonal pattern: This specifier applies to recurrent major depressive disorder.

A.
There has been a regular temporal relationship between theonset of major depressive episodes in major depressive disorder and a particular time of the year (e.g., in the fall or winter).

Note: Do not include cases in which there is an obvious effect of seasonally related psychosocial stressors (e.g., regularly being unemployed every winter).

B.
Full remissions (or a change from major depression to maniaor hypomania) also occur at a characteristic time of the year
(e.g., depression disappears in the spring).

C.
In the last 2 years, two major depressive episodes have occurred that demonstrate the temporal seasonal relationshipsdefined above and no nonseasonal major depressive episodes have occurred during that same period.

D.
Seasonal major depressive episodes (as described above)substantially outnumber the nonseasonal major depressive episodes that may have occurred over the individual’s lifet ime.

Note: The specifier “with seasonal pattern” can be applied to the pattern of major depressive episodes in major depressive disorder, recurrent. The essential feature is the onset and remission of major depressive episodes at characteristic times of the year. In most cases, the episodes begin in fall or winter and remit in spring.
Less commonly, there may be recurrent summer depressive episodes. This pattern of onset and remission of episodes must have occurred during at least a 2-year period, without any nonseasonal episodes occurring during this period. In addition, the seasonal depressive episodes must substantially outnumber any nonseasonal depressive episodes over the individual’s lifetime.
This specifier does not apply to those situations in which the pattern is better explained by seasonally linked psychosocial stressors (e.g., seasonal unemployment or school schedule). Major depressive episodes that occur in a seasonal pattern are often characterized by loss of energy, hypersomnia, overeating, weight gain, and a craving for carbohydrates. It is unclear whether a seasonal pattern is more likely in recurrent major depressive disorder or in bipolar disorders. However, within the bipolar disorders group, a seasonal pattern appears to be more likely in bipolar II disorder than in bipolar I disorder. In some individuals, the onset of manic or hypomanic episodes may also be linked to a particular season.
The prevalence of winter-type seasonal pattern appears to vary with latitude, age, and sex. Prevalence increases with higher latitudes. Age is also a strong predictor of seasonality, with younger persons at higher risk for winter depressive episodes.

Specify if:
In partial remission: Symptoms of the immediately previous major depressive episode are present, but full criteria are not met, or there is a period lasting less than 2 months without any significant symptoms of a major depressive episode following the end of such an episode.
In full remission: During the past 2 months, no significant signs or symptoms of the disturbance were present.
Specify current severity:
Severity is based on the number of criterion symptoms, the severity of those symptoms, and the degree of functional disability.
Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis are present, the intensity of the symptoms is distressing but manageable, and the symptoms result in minor impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Moderate: The number of symptoms, intensity of symptoms, and/or functional impairment are between those specified for
“mild” and “severe.”
Severe: The number of symptoms is substantially in excess of that required to make the diagnosis, the intensity of the symptoms is seriously distressing and unmanageable, and the symptoms markedly interfere with social and occupational functioning.